# FPGA Tutorial Design: Loop `ivdep` Attribute

| Optimized for                     | Description
---                                 |---
| OS                                | Linux* Ubuntu* 18.04; Windows* 10 or Windows* Server 2016
| Hardware                          | Intel(R) Programmable Acceleration Card (PAC) with Intel(R) Arria(R) 10 GX FPGA
| Software                          | Intel(R) oneAPI DPC++ Compiler (Beta) 

_Notice: Limited support in Windows*, Compiling for FPGA hardware is not supported in Windows*_

## Purpose
This tutorial demonstrates a simple example of applying the `ivdep` attribute
on a loop to aid the compiler's loop dependence analysis.

## Key Concepts
This tutorial helps you learn the following concepts:
* Basics of loop-carried dependencies
* The notion of a loop-carried dependence distance
* Determine what constitutes a *safe* dependence distance
* Determine how to aid the compiler's dependence analysis to maximize performance.

## Loop-carried Memory Dependencies
A loop-carried memory dependency refers to a situation where memory access in a
given loop iteration cannot proceed until a memory access from a previous loop
iteration is completed. Loop-carried dependencies can be categorized into the
following cases:
* **True-dependence (Read-After-Write)** - A memory location read in an iteration
  that must occur after a previous iteration writes to the same memory location.
* **Anti-dependence (Write-After-Read)** - A memory location read must occur before
  a future iteration writes to the same memory location.
* **Output-dependence (Write-After-Write)** - A memory location write must occur
  before a future iteration writes to the same memory location.

The Intel(R) oneAPI DPC++ Compiler (Beta) employs static analysis to scan the program's code
to establish the dependence relationships between all memory accesses in a loop.
However, depending on the complexity of the addressing expressions and the
loop's stride or upper bound, the compiler may not be able to statically determine
precise dependence information. In such scenarios, the compiler must
conservatively assume some statements to be dependent to guarantee
functional correctness of the generated hardware. Precise dependence information
is crucially important to generate an efficient pipelined datapath. Such
information reduces the number of assumed dependencies, allowing the hardware
schedule to extract as much pipeline parallelism from loops as possible.

### Example 1: Basic True-Dependence
Each iteration of the loop reads a value from memory location that is written
to in the previous iteration. The pipelined datapath generated by the compiler
cannot issue a new iteration until the previous iteration is
complete.

```c++
for(i = 1; i < n; i++){
  S: a[i] = a[i-1];
}
```

### Example 2: Complex or Statically-Unknown Indexing Expression
The compiler cannot statically infer the true access pattern for the loads from
array `a`. To guarantee functional correctness, the compiler must
conservatively assume the statements in the loop to be dependent across all
iterations. The resulting generated datapath issues new iterations, similar to
the example 1, executing one iteration at a time.
```c++
for(i = 0; i < n; i++){
  S: a[i] = a[b[i]];
}
```

### Example 3: Loop-independent Dependence
Some memory dependencies in program code do not span multiple iterations of a
loop. In the following example code, dependencies from statement `S2` on `S1` and
from statement `S3` on `S1` are referred to as loop-independent memory
dependencies. Such dependencies do not prevent the compiler from generating an
efficient pipelined loop datapath and are not considered in this tutorial.
```c++
for(i = 0; i < n; i++){
  S1: a[i] = foo();
  ...
  S2: b[i] = a[i];
}
for(j = 0; j < m; j++){
  S3: A[i] = bar();
}
```

## Loop-carried Dependence Distance
Imagine loop-carried dependencies in terms of the distance between the
dependence source and sink statements, measured in the number of iterations of
the loop containing the statements. In the example 1, the dependence source
(store into array `a`) and dependence sink (load from the same index in array
`a`) are one iteration apart. That is, for the specified memory location, the
data is read one iteration after it was written. Therefore, this true dependence
has a distance of 1. In many cases, the compiler loop dependence analysis may be
able to statically determine the dependence distance.

### Example 4: Simple Dependence Distance
The compiler's static analysis facilities can infer that the distance of the true
dependence in the following example code is 10 iterations. This has an impact on the
scheduling of how iterations of the loop are issued into the generated pipelined
datapath. For example, iteration `k` may not begin executing the load from array
`a` before iteration `(k-10)` has completed storing the data into the same
memory location. However, iterations `[k-9,k)` do not incur the scheduling
constraint on the store in iteration `(k-10)` and begin execution earlier.
```c++
for(i = 1; i < n; i++){
  S: a[i] = a[i-10];
}
```

### Example 5: Dependence Distance Across Multiple Loops in a Nest
Statement `S`, in the code snippet that follows, forms two distinct true
dependencies, one carried by loop `L1` and one by loop `L2`. Across iterations
of loop `L1`, data is stored into a location in array `a` that is read in the
next iteration. Similarly, across iterations of loop `L2`, data is stored into a
location in array `a` that is read in a later iteration. In the latter case, the
dependence across loop `L2` has dependence distance of 2. In the former, the
dependence distance across loop `L1` has dependence distance of 1. Special care
must be taken when reasoning about loop-carried memory dependencies spanning
multiple loops.
```c++
L1: for(i = 1; i < n; i++){
  L2: for(j = 1; j < m; j++){
        S: a[i][j] = a[i-1][j-2];
  }
}
```

## Specifying That Accesses to Memory Does Cause Loop-Carried Dependencies
Apply the `ivdep` attribute to a loop to inform the compiler that ***none*** of
the memory accesses within a loop incur loop-carried dependencies.
```c++
[[intelfpga::ivdep]]
for (int i = 0; i < N; i++) {
    A[i] = A[i - X[i]];
}
```
The `ivdep` attribute indicates to the compiler that it can disregard assumed loop-carried memory
dependencies and generate a pipelined datapath for this loop capable of issuing
new iterations as soon as possible (every cycle), maximizing possible
throughput.

## Specifying That Accesses to Memory Does Not Cause Loop-Carried Dependencies Across a Fixed Distance
Apply the `ivdep` attribute with a `safelen` parameter to set a specific lower
bound on the dependence distance that can possibly be attributed to loop-carried
dependencies in the associated loop.
```c++
// n is a constant expression of integer type
[[intelfpga::ivdep(n)]]
for (int i = 0; i < N; i++) {
    A[i] = A[i - X[i]];
}
```
The `ivdep` attribute informs the compiler to generate a pipelined loop datapath that can issue a
new iteration as soon as the iteration `n` iterations ago has completed. The
attribute parameter (`safelen`) is a refinement of the compiler static
loop-carried dependence analysis that infers the dependence present in the code
but is otherwise unable to accurately determine its distance.

***IMPORTANT***: Applying the `ivdep` attribute or the `ivdep` attribute with a
`safelen` parameter may lead to incorrect results if the annotated loop exhibits
loop-carried memory dependencies. The attribute directs the compiler to generate
hardware assuming no loop-carried dependencies. Specifying this assumption
incorrectly is an invalid use of the attribute, and likely results in undefined
behavior.

## Testing the Tutorial
In `loop_ivdep.cpp`, the `ivdep` attribute is applied to the kernel work loop with
a `safelen` parameter of 1 and 128.
```c++
  TRANSPOSE_AND_FOLD(A, B, minSafelen); // minSafelen = 1
  TRANSPOSE_AND_FOLD(A, C, maxSafelen); // maxSafelen = 128
```
The `ivdep` attribute with `safelen` parameter equal to 1 informs the compiler
that iterations of the associated loop do not form a loop-carried memory
dependence with a distance of at least 1. That is, the attribute is redundant
and is equivalent to the code without the attribute in place.

***Try this!***: Compile the tutorial program in `loop_ivdep.cpp` with and without the `[[intelfpga::ivdep]]` attribute on line 63 and compare the produced .html report to verify.

The `ivdep` attribute with `safelen` parameter equal to 128 is reflective of the
maximum number of iterations of the associated loop among which no loop-carried
memory dependence occurs. The annotated loop nest contains a dependence on
values of array `tmpBuff`:

```c++
for (int j = 0; j < matrixSize * rowLength; j++) {
    for (int i = 0; i < rowLength; i++) {
        tmpBuff[j % rowLength][i] += inBuff[i][j % rowLength];
    }
}
```
Observe that the indexing expression on `tmpBuff` evaluates to the same index
every `rowLength` iterations of the `j` loop. Specifying the `ivdep` attribute
on the `j` loop without a `safelen` parameter, or with a `safelen` parameter >=
`rowLength` leads to undefined behaviour because the generated hardware
does not adhere to the ordering constraint imposed by the dependence.
Specifying the `ivdep` attribute with a `safelen` attribute <= `rowLength` is
valid and will result in a more performant end result.

### Building the 'loop_ivdep' Design (Linux)
**NOTE**: CMake is required to build the design.

1. Generating `Makefiles`.
  ```
  mkdir build
  cd build
  cmake ..
  ```
2. Compile the design through the generated `Makefile`. The following four build targets are provided that matches the recommended development flow:

   * Compile and run on a CPU host device

     ```
     make cpu_host
     ./loop_ivdep.cpu_host
     ```

   * Compile and run on the FPGA emulator.

     ```
     make fpga_emu or make
     ./loop_ivdep.fpga_emu
     ```
   * Generate the HTML optimization report.

     ```
     make report
     ```
     Locate the report the `loop_ivdep_report.prj/reports/report.html` directory.

   * Compile and run on an FPGA hardware:

     ```
     make fpga
     ./loop_ivdep.fpga
     ```
3. Download the design, compiled for FPGA hardware, from this location: [download page](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/programmable/products/design-software/high-level-design/one-api-for-fpga-support.html)

You can observe the performance gain described in this tutorial only when you target an FPGA hardware.

When executing the tutorial on an FPGA hardware, you should observe the following output in the console:

> `RESULT: The results are correct`

The following table summarizes the execution time (in ms) and throughput (in
MFlops) for `safelen` parameters of 1 (redundant attribute) and 128 (`rowLength`)
for a default input matrix size of 128 x 128 floats on Intel® Programmable
Acceleration Card with Intel® Arria® 10 GX FPGA and the Intel(R) oneAPI DPC++ Compiler (Beta).

Safelen | Kernel Time (ms) | Throughput (KB/s)
------------- | ------------- | -----------------------
1     | 50 | 1320
128   | 10 | 6403

With the `ivdep` attribute applied with the maximum safe `safelen` parameter, the kernel
execution time is decreased by a factor of ~5.

Examine the Loops Analysis section of the HTML optimization
report for the following:
* The initiation interval (II) reported for the kernel version with
`safelen` value of 1 is 5 cycles: `Compiler failed to schedule this loop with
smaller II due to memory dependency`.
* The II reported for the kernel version with `safelen` value of 128 is the optimal 1 cycle: `a new iteration is issued
into the pipelined loop datapath on every cycle`.

### Building the 'loop_ivdep' Design (Windows)
**NOTE**: CMake is required to build the design.

Note: `cmake` is not yet supported on Windows, a build.ninja file is provided instead. 

1. Enter source file directory.

```
cd src
```
2. Compile the design. The following four build targets are provided that matches the recommended development flow:

   * Compile and run on a CPU host device

     ```
     ninja cpu_host
     loop_ivdep.cpu_host.exe
     ```

   * Compile and run on the FPGA emulator.

     ```
     ninja fpga_emu
     loop_ivdep.fpga_emu.exe
     ```
   * Generate the HTML optimization report.

     ```
     ninja report
     ```
     Locate the report the `../src/loop_ivdep.prj/reports/report.html` directory.

   * **Not supported yet:** Compile and run on an FPGA hardware.

## Building the `loop_ivdep` Design in Third-Party Integrated Development Environments (IDEs)

You can compile and run this tutorial in the Eclipse* IDE (in Linux*) and the Visual Studio* IDE (in Windows*). For instructions, refer to the following link: [Intel(R) oneAPI DPC++ FPGA Workflows on Third-Party IDEs](https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/intel-oneapi-dpcpp-fpga-workflow-on-ide)
